DOCSP-4466 Add CSOT (#951)
mongodb/docs-node: source/fundamentals/connection/csot.txt

.. _node-csot:

Limit Server Execution Time
===========================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference
 
.. meta::
   :keywords: error, blocking, thread, task

Overview
--------

When you use {+driver-short+} to perform a server operation, you can also limit
the duration allowed for the server to finish the operation. To do so,

> specify a **client-side operation timeout**. The timeout applies to all steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specify a **client-side operation timeout (CSOT)**. The timeout applies to all steps
```

needed to complete the operation, including server selection, connection
checkout, serialization, and server-side execution. When the timeout expires,
{+driver-short+} raises a timeout exception.

> You can specify a timeout by using the ``timeoutMS`` option.

Reviewer: S: remove from here and mention only under the first heading

```suggestion
```

.. note:: Experimental Feature

>    The Client-Side Operation Timeout (CSOT) feature is experimental and might

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The CSOT feature is experimental and might
```

   change in future driver releases.

timeoutMS Option
----------------

You can specify the ``timeoutMS`` option in your ``MongoClientOptions``
instance or at the database, collection, session, transaction, or operation
levels.

To specify a timeout when connecting to a MongoDB deployment, set the

> ``timeoutMS`` connection option to the timeout length in milliseconds.

Reviewer: S: make this the opening paragraph, then add the previous paragraph to the end of it

The following code example uses the ``timeoutMS`` option to specify a timeout of
10 seconds when instantiating a new ``MongoClient`` instance:

.. code-block:: javascript

>    const uri = "mongodb://<db_username>:<db_password>@<hostname:<port>";

Reviewer: S: remove authentication details since there are several kinds they could be using

```suggestion
   const uri = "mongodb://<hostname:<port>";
```

   const client = new MongoClient(uri, {
     timeoutMS: 10000
    });

> When you specify the ``timeoutMS`` option, it always takes precedence over the
> following options:
> 
> - ``socketTimeoutMS``
> - ``waitQueueTimeoutMS``
> - ``wTimeoutMS``
> - ``maxTimeMS``
> - ``maxCommitTimeMS``
> 
> .. note:: Experimental Feature
> 
>    When the CSOT feature is no longer experimental, the preceding options will
>    be deprecated. The ``timeoutMS`` option will superse the older, deprecated
>    options. 

Reviewer: S: combine into single note

```suggestion
.. note:: 

   The ``timeoutMS`` connection option takes precedence over the
   following options:

   - ``socketTimeoutMS``
   - ``waitQueueTimeoutMS``
   - ``wTimeoutMS``
   - ``maxTimeMS``
   - ``maxCommitTimeMS``

   When the CSOT feature is no longer experimental, the preceding options will
   be deprecated.
```

If you specify the ``timeoutMS`` option, the driver automatically applies the

> specified timeout to each server operation. The following code example specifies

Reviewer: q: i thought the timeout applied to the total time for all operations in the aggregate. does this depend on the level at which you specify it?

Author: It's been awhile since I initially wrote this but if I recall correctly this was how CSOT is also described in the PyMongo doc so I carried this intro over but will see if there is a better way to describe this during technical review!

a timeout limit of 10 seconds at the collection level, and then calls the
``insertOne()`` method:

.. literalinclude:: /code-snippets/connection/csot-operation.js
   :language: javascript
   :start-after: start-operation
   :end-before: end-operation

> Inheritance Behavior
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: s: could be confused with JS object inheritance

```suggestion
Timeout Inheritance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

When you specify a ``timeoutMS`` option, the driver applies the timeout
according to the same inheritance behaviors as other {+driver-short+} options.
The following list describes how the timeout value is inherited at each level:

> - **Operation Level**: Takes the highest precedence and will override ``timeoutMS``

Reviewer: if this order is hierarchical, it might make more sense as a numbered list to clearly show precedence.

it could also be helpful to word every list entry in the same way. e.g.: 'Applies to X. Can be overridden by Y.' you could also structure it as a table if you like the look of it.

Author: I updated it to be a table I kind of think that makes it easier to skim lmk what you think!

  options set at any other level.

- **Transaction Level**: Takes precedence over ``timeoutMS`` set at the session,
  collection, database, or client level.

> - **Session Level**: Inherits to all transactions and operations within
>   that session, unless the option is overridden by options set at those levels.
> 
> - **Collection Level**: Inherits to all sessions and operations on that

Reviewer: should this be 'applies to'?

```suggestion
- **Session Level**: Applies to all transactions and operations within
  that session, unless the option is overridden by options set at those levels.

- **Collection Level**: Applies to all sessions and operations on that
```

  collection, unless the option is overridden by options set at those levels.

- **Database Level**: Applies to all collections within that database. It is
  inherited by all sessions, collections, and operations within the collections
  on that database, unless the option is overridden by an option set at a level
  with higher precedence.

- **Client Level**: Applies to all databases, collections, sessions,
  transactions, and operations within that client that do not otherwise specify
  ``timeoutMS``.

For more information on overrides and specific options, see the :ref:`Overrides
<node-csot-overrides>` section.

.. _node-csot-overrides:

Overrides
---------

> The Node.js driver supports various levels of configuration to control the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {+driver-short+} supports various levels of configuration to control the
```

behavior and performance of database operations. 

You can specify a ``timeoutMS`` option at the operation level to override the
client-level configuration for a specific operation. This allows you to
customize timeouts based on the needs of individual queries.

The following example demonstrates how an operation-level ``timeoutMS``
configuration can override a client-level ``timeoutMS`` configuration:

.. literalinclude:: /code-snippets/connection/csot.js
   :language: javascript
   :start-after: start-csot
   :end-before: end-csot

> Transactions

Reviewer: q: can you help me understand the relationship between Overrides / Transactions / Client Encryption? it almost seems like overrides should be appended to the previous section on inheritance.

Author: Yeah I was debating how to organize this and actually ended up adding the inheritance section after writing these for additional clarity around the expected behavior. I added that as a subsection thinking it was more connected to the option, while the Overrides section calls out some behavior specific to the example use case, transactions, and client encryption. Mostly based on what was requested in the ticket. Does this make sense as is or do you think it needs further tweaking on the section headings?

- `withTransaction() <{+api+}/classes/ClientSession.html#withTransaction>`__
- `endSession()
  <{+api+}/classes/ClientSession.html#endSession>`__

If you do not specify ``defaultTimeoutMS``, the driver uses the ``timeoutMS``
value set on the parent ``MongoClient``.

You cannot override ``defaultTimeoutMS`` by setting the ``timeoutMS`` option on an
operation in a transaction session provided by the ``withTransaction()`` callback.
Doing so throws an error.

Client Encryption
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When you use Client-Side Field Level Encryption (CSFLE), the driver uses the
``timeoutMS`` option to limit the time allowed for encryption and decryption
operations.

If you specify the ``timeoutMS`` option when you construct a
``ClientEncryption`` instance, it controls the lifetime of all operations
performed on that instance. If you do not provide ``timeoutMS``, the instance
inherits the ``timeoutMS`` setting from the ``MongoClient`` used in the
``ClientEncryption`` constructor.

If you set ``timeoutMS`` on both the client and directly in
``ClientEncryption``, the value provided to ``ClientEncryption`` takes
precedence.

Cursors
-------

> Cursors require special handling when you use the CSOT feature. The
> ``timeOutMS`` option is configurable on a per-cursor basis. You can configure
> cursors to interact with CSOT by using etiher the cursor lifetime or cursor
> iteration mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cursors require special handling when you use the CSOT feature. 
You can configure
cursors to interact with CSOT by using either the cursor lifetime or cursor
iteration mode.
```

Cursor Lifetime Mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The ``cursorLifetime`` mode uses ``timeoutMS`` to bound the entire lifetime of a

Reviewer: s:

```suggestion
The ``cursorLifetime`` mode uses ``timeoutMS`` to limit the entire lifetime of a
```

> The ``cursorLifetime`` mode uses ``timeoutMS`` to bound the entire lifetime of a

Reviewer: i don't see this term used in code, so i'd use normal formatting

```suggestion
The cursor lifetime mode uses ``timeoutMS`` to bound the entire lifetime of a
```

cursor. This is the default timeout mode for non-tailable cursors, such as

> ``find()``, ``aggregate()``, or ``listCollections()``. In this mode, the initialization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
those returned by the ``find()``, ``aggregate()``, and ``listCollections()`` methods.
In this mode, the initialization
```

> of the cursor and all subsequent ``getMore()`` calls must finish within the limit

Reviewer: s:

```suggestion
of the cursor and all subsequent calls to the ``getMore()`` method must finish within the limit
```

> specified with ``timeoutMS``. If they do not, the system throws a timeout error. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specified by the ``timeoutMS`` option. If they do not, the system throws a timeout error. 
```

> Closing a cursor, either as part of a ``toArray()`` call or manually using the
> ``close()`` method, resets the timeout.

Reviewer: s:

```suggestion
When you close a cursor by calling the ``toArray()`` or ``close()`` method,
the timeout resets.
```

> Set the ``timeoutMS`` option to ensure the cursor initialization and retrieval
> of all documents occur within 10 seconds, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer: s: this reads like a direction, which i don't think it is

```suggestion
The following example shows how to set the ``timeoutMS`` option to ensure that
the cursor is initialized and all documents are retrieved within 10 seconds:
```

.. code-block:: javascript

   const docs = await collection.find({}, {timeoutMS: 10000}).toArray();

Cursor Iteration Mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The iteration mode uses ``timeoutMS`` to bind each ``next()``, ``hasNext()``, or

Reviewer: s:

```suggestion
The cursor iteration mode uses the ``timeoutMS`` option to limit each ``next()``, ``hasNext()``, or
```

> The iteration mode uses ``timeoutMS`` to bind each ``next()``, ``hasNext()``, or
> ``tryNext()`` call. The timeout refreshes after each call completes. This is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The iteration mode uses ``timeoutMS`` to bind each call to the ``next()``, ``hasNext()``, or
``tryNext()`` method. The timeout refreshes after each call completes. This is the
```

> default mode for all tailable cursors, such as tailable ``find()`` cursors on
> capped collections or change streams.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
default mode for all tailable cursors, such as the tailable cursors returned by
the ``find()`` method on capped collections or change streams.
```

.. _node-csot:

Limit Server Execution Time
===========================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference
 
.. meta::
   :keywords: error, blocking, thread, task

Overview
--------

When you use the {+driver-short+} to perform a server operation, you can also
limit the duration allowed for the server to finish the operation. To do so,
specify a **client-side operation timeout (CSOT)**. The timeout applies to all
steps needed to complete the operation, including server selection, connection
checkout, serialization, and server-side execution. When the timeout expires,
the {+driver-short+} raises a timeout exception.

.. note:: Experimental Feature

   The CSOT feature is experimental and might change in future driver releases.

timeoutMS Option
----------------

To specify a timeout when connecting to a MongoDB deployment, set the
``timeoutMS`` connection option to the timeout length in milliseconds. You can
specify the ``timeoutMS`` option in your ``MongoClientOptions`` instance or at

> the database, collection, session, transaction, or operation levels.

Author: Will update and add an example 👍

The following code example uses the ``timeoutMS`` option to specify a timeout of

> 10 seconds when instantiating a new ``MongoClient`` instance:

Author: If it is more expected as a use case, I think using 30 seconds as the example here makes sense. Will update.

> 10 seconds when instantiating a new ``MongoClient`` instance:

Author: Note: I didn't update all of the examples to have a longer timeout but lmk if you think that is preferrable!

If you specify the ``timeoutMS`` option, the driver automatically applies the
specified timeout to each server operation. The following code example specifies
a timeout of 10 seconds at the client level, and then calls the ``insertOne()``
method:

.. literalinclude:: /code-snippets/connection/csot-operation.js
   :language: javascript
   :start-after: start-operation
   :end-before: end-operation

Timeout Inheritance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When you specify a ``timeoutMS`` option, the driver applies the timeout
according to the same inheritance behaviors as the other {+driver-short+} options.
The following table describes how the timeout value is inherited at each level:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - Level
     - Inheritance Description

   * - Operation
     - Takes the highest precedence and will override ``timeoutMS``
       options set at any other level.

   * - Transaction
     - Takes precedence over ``timeoutMS`` set at the session,
       collection, database, or client level.

   * - Session
     - Applies to all transactions and operations within
       that session, unless the option is overridden by options set at those levels.

> 

Author: Adding, let me know if the update is accurate!

- `withTransaction() <{+api+}/classes/ClientSession.html#withTransaction>`__
- `endSession()
  <{+api+}/classes/ClientSession.html#endSession>`__

If you do not specify ``defaultTimeoutMS``, the driver uses the ``timeoutMS``
value set on the parent ``MongoClient``.

You cannot override ``defaultTimeoutMS`` by setting the ``timeoutMS`` option on an
operation in a transaction session provided by the ``withTransaction()`` callback.
Doing so throws an error.

Client Encryption
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When you use Client-Side Field Level Encryption (CSFLE), the driver uses the
``timeoutMS`` option to limit the time allowed for encryption and decryption
operations.

If you specify the ``timeoutMS`` option when you construct a
``ClientEncryption`` instance, it controls the lifetime of all operations
performed on that instance. If you do not provide ``timeoutMS``, the instance
inherits the ``timeoutMS`` setting from the ``MongoClient`` used in the
``ClientEncryption`` constructor.

If you set ``timeoutMS`` on both the client and directly in
``ClientEncryption``, the value provided to ``ClientEncryption`` takes
precedence.

Cursors
-------

> Cursors require special handling when you use the CSOT feature. You can configure

Author: Revising!

cursors to interact with CSOT by using either the cursor lifetime or cursor
iteration mode.

Cursor Lifetime Mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The cursor lifetime mode uses ``timeoutMS`` to limit the entire lifetime of a
cursor. This is the default timeout mode for non-tailable cursors, such as those
returned by the ``find()``, ``aggregate()``, and ``listCollections()`` methods.
In this mode, the initialization of the cursor and all subsequent calls to the

> ``getMore()`` method must finish within the limit specified by the ``timeoutMS``

Author: Rephrasing a bit, lmk if the update looks good.

option. If they do not, the system throws a timeout error. 

When you close a cursor by calling the  ``toArray()`` or ``close()`` method, the

> timeout resets.

Author: You can ignore the failing test, our linter gets mad at the word `killCursors` 😅

The following example shows how to set the ``timeoutMS`` option to ensure that
the cursor is initialized and all documents are retrieved within 10 seconds:

.. code-block:: javascript

   const docs = await collection.find({}, {timeoutMS: 10000}).toArray();

Cursor Iteration Mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The cursor iteration mode uses the ``timeoutMS`` option to limit each call to
the ``next()``, ``hasNext()``, or ``tryNext()`` method. The timeout refreshes
after each call completes. This is the default mode for all tailable cursors,
such as the tailable cursors returned by the ``find()`` method on capped
collections or change streams.

As shown in the following example, the cursor continues to fetch new documents

> as they are added to a collection and times out if it takes longer than 10
> seconds to retrieve documents:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as they are added to a collection and times out if it takes longer than 10
seconds to retrieve a document:
```

Practically speaking, the timeout is only going to be "counted down" when fetching a batch of documents, so this is accurate. However, the intention is that from the user's perspective, each next call (so per document) is bounded by the timeoutMS value.

.. code-block:: javascript

   for await (const doc of cappedCollection.find({}, 
      {tailable: true, timeoutMS: 10000})) {
      // Handle each document

>    };

Reviewer 2: While tailable cursors are defaulted to the other timeoutMode I think that their usage is rare enough that it is unnecessary for us to combine their use with the timeoutMode setting for our only example for iteration mode. 

If I am using a normal find cursor and I want to perform some async action for each document timeoutMode=iteration is what I'm going to want to use so I don't bound my "some action" code by the driver's timeoutMS setting:

```ts
for await (const movie of mflix.find({}, { timeoutMode: 'iteration' })) {
  const imdbResponse = await fetch(movie.imdb_url);
  console.log(await imdbResponse.text());
}
```

If you left the timeoutMode in lifetime here then the cursor's time to finish would likely be deeply cut into by the http fetch operation. I think an example like this is a bit more practical to the average user compared to tailable cursors.
